hello everyone welcome to the next
lecture in theory of computation and in
this lecture we will be seeing an
example about our DFA or deterministic
finite automata we shall be seeing how
to design a particular DFA in this
example all right so let's get
started okay so we have an example here
which is a language L1 which is a set of
all strings that starts with zero L1 is
a language which is a set of all strings
that starts with zero and we need to
design a deterministic finite automata
or DFA for this language L1 so let's see
how we can do that but before starting
that let us see what will be the
elements in this set now this is a set
of all strings that starts with zero the
elements in this set would be like 0 0 0
0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 and so
on this is actually an infinite set
because any string that starts with zero
is present in this language L one okay
now let's see how we can design the DFA
for this so whenever you start a DFA you
should always start
with a
state which is my initial state or start
state so I already told you in the
previous lecture that whenever you see
an arrow coming from nowhere pointing to
a state that shows that that is the
starting state so a is my starting state
so I'm starting with a now if I get
input zero in a what will happen and if
I get input one in a what will happen
let's see what should we do suppose I
get input zero in this a I send it to
another state which I call
B okay and I put a double circle around
this B
now what is the meaning of this double
circle double circle means this is the
final State when you see a double circle
it always means that this is the final
State now when I get give input zero to
a it goes to B now why is that that is
because I am to design a DFA that
accepts all string that starts with zero
so a is my starting State and I'm get
I'm getting input zero that means zero
is the first digit and when Zer is a
first digit it goes to b b which is the
final State and whenever a string
reaches the final state that means that
string is accepted and whenever a string
does not reach the final state that
means it is rejected so whenever I'm
starting with zero it should reach the
final State because it should be
accepted why because I am to
design uh a DFA for all strings that
starts with zero okay now I am in state
B and in state after reaching State B in
B also I can either get inputs Zer or
one so what will happen if I get either
Z or one since B is the final
State I'll give a self Loop here and
I'll write zero or one so what does this
mean this means that after reaching this
final State B whatever input you get
after that whether it is zero or one it
stays in the final State B itself okay
because the string started from zero and
our only condition is that it should
start with zero so it starts with zero
and after it reach the final reaches the
final State whether it is zero or one it
doesn't matter it stays in the final
State and that string will be accepted
okay I hope that was clear and now is
this complete no this DF is not complete
why because we already mentioned what
will happen if a gets the input zero but
we did not mention what will happen if a
gets the input one so a is my starting
State and if I get input one that means
one is the first digit and should that
be accepted or not no it should not be
accepted I should accept only those
strings which start with zero so if it
starts with one what will happen I'll
send it to another
state which I call State
C okay I send it to another state called
State
C when the input is one when the input
is one it goes to State
C
and in state C after reaching State C
whatever input I get in state
C it stays in state C itself whether it
is zero or
one okay so if I if a string starts with
one this is my starting state if it
starts with one it goes to State C and
after reaching State C whether it is
zero or one
after you whether you get zero or one it
stays in state C itself and it cannot go
back to this final State anymore okay it
cannot go to this final State anymore so
this kind of state is known as de
State dead
state
or it's also known as trap
State trap
State why is it known as de state or
trap state because once you reach here
it it is trapped over here it cannot
reach the final State anymore which is B
okay and when a string cannot reach it
final state that string will be rejected
okay so now my DF is complete because I
have already mentioned in a if I get
zero it goes to B it gets one it goes to
C it's complete and in B whether it is
zero or one it stays in B itself and in
C whether it is zero or one it stays in
C itself now my DFA is complete now I
have designed the DFA for the set of all
strings that starts with
zero okay now let us check if this is
correct let us take a few two examples
to see if this is working so in my first
example let me take an example I want to
check the string
01 okay so I'm going to check for the
string 001 so it always starts from my
initial State my initial
State initial state which is a I start
from State a right because a is my
initial State and I get input I give
input zero on getting input zero what
happens a goes to B A goes to B and the
next input is zero
again so I am right now in state B right
and if I get input zero what happens B
it stays in B itself it stays in B
itself and then the next one is the next
input is
one so what will happen I'm in state B
and if I get input one what happens it
still stays in state
B right and here I reach the end of the
string and at the end of the string what
is my position I am in B I'm in B and B
is it the final State yes it is the
final State B is
the final
state right so since B is the final
State this string should be accepted why
it could start from the initial State
and it reach the final State since it
could reach the final State this is
accepted all right now let's take
another
example example number two is
101 again I start from my initial
State what is my initial state it is
a and I get the input one one is the
first input and on getting input one
where does a go it goes to State
C goes to State C and I'm in state C and
the next input is zero so on getting
input zero what happens I'm in state C
and when State C gets input zero what
happens it stays in C itself stay
in C itself okay and what is the next
input it is
one so what happens when I get input one
I'm in state C right and when I get
input one what happens it stays in state
C still stays in state C and now I've
reached the end of the string right and
where am I at the end of the string I am
in state C I'm in state C and is C the
final State no I don't see any double
circle around here that means C is not
the final State C
is
not final fin
state so since this string started from
the initial state but could not reach
the final State this string is not
accepted it is rejected so we see that
when the string when this string started
with zero it was accepted but this
string as it started from one it was not
accepted so we have successfully
designed a DFA for all strings that
starts with zero and these examples are
the proof for that so I hope hope that
was clear in the next lecture we will be
seeing some more examples so thank you
for watching and see you in the next one
[Music]